---
title: The spunky taste of butterfly soup
date: 10-30-2022
string: butterfly-soup
---
I rarely come across games that subvert my expectations as much as “Butterfly Soup” did. Upon reading its blurb–“a visual novel about gay asian girls playing baseball and falling in love”–I laughed aloud and gleefully hit the “download” button, sparing a guilty glance at the author’s donation prompt. I expected a lighthearted, ditzy story that would distract me from my math homework under the guise of academic scrutiny. What I received instead was an almost blow-by-blow account of my high school struggles (with a side of sports metaphors) that nearly brought me to tears. Under the somewhat puzzling yet novel backdrop of baseball, Brianna Lei masterfully balances solemnity and silliness to explore Asian American and queer struggles. The game’s characters, narrative, and artistic direction create a nostalgic experience that encourages players to reflect deeply on their upbringing.

The visual novel format of “Butterfly Soup” lends itself especially well to the relatability of the game. For instance, the character designs are reminiscent of those of manga novels or anime, which I can imagine a nontrivial portion of Lei’s audience, myself included, enjoy. In fact, seeing these characters’ sprites over and over again as the game progresses persuades us to remember their visual design and see the ways that we are reflected in their actions through sheer exposure. The in-game texting scenes also convey the characters’ online identities–a crucial aspect of teens nowadays–inviting us to align our own online personae with theirs. Perhaps most notably, “Butterfly Soup” references memes of all formats, from the recorder parody of “My Heart Will Go On” to a humorous illustration of Akarsha seated atop Min riding a skateboard. Inclusion of such memes are bound to induce a chuckle amongst the game’s young adult players. At the very least, it encouraged me to keep clicking through the wordier, less interesting baseball scenes, which the game’s format did not serve as well. In all, the classification of “Butterfly Soup” as a video game and not just a narrative plays an important role in its ability to resonate with its audience.

Lei explains queerness, being Asian American, and teenage angst through the unexpected lens of baseball, an arrangement I slowly warmed up to as I noticed the satisfying irony of such a diverse cast playing such an American sport. Set in 2008 with Prop 8 having just passed, we watch the characters navigate the already stormy waters of high school with added intersectional adversities. To familiarize the players with this liminal world, Lei uses baseball, a quintessential American sport, to explain the predominantly Asian characters’ mannerisms. For example, Min’s characteristic knuckleball reflects her risk-taking behavior, and Diya’s unwavering ability to catch it symbolizes their romantic connection. This uniquely bridges the branches of each character’s dual heritage and pokes fun at cliched, mostly heterosexual baseball euphemisms by looking at them from a queer perspective. Most importantly, “Butterfly Soup”’s exploration of LGBT and minority characters’ intersectional hardships is a welcome respite from most mainstream games’ character representations. Though diversity in games has improved over the years, some games that I have played or heard of, e.g. the Fallout Series, merely include minority characters as NPCs without much backstory. Though this is sometimes necessary, seeing the characters blossom in “Butterfly Soup” motivates me to find other games that have richly developed POC or queer protagonists.

This game is especially memorable because of my personal connections to the characters and to the creator. As a queer Asian American who grew up in the San Francisco Bay Area like Lei herself, I wish I had heard of this game when I was a closeted teenager wondering how to reconcile my identity with my conservative Asian parents. For example, I found it surprising that I acted exactly like each of the four main characters throughout my childhood, even though their personalities differ wildly. I was a carbon copy of Min during elementary school, embodied Noelle’s overachieving attitude and emotional repression throughout middle school, and contained a bizarre mix of Diya’s social anxiety and Akarsha’s joking masquerade during high school. In addition, many scenes from the game seem to have been plucked straight out of my life; Noelle’s parents comparing her to other academically accomplished Asian children, Min’s parents imposing traditional gender roles on her, and the everyday conversations between the four friends are striking flashbacks to my time as a preteen/teen, no doubt also inspired by Lei’s own high school experiences. Apart from encouraging introspection on how my upbringing made me who I am today, this jarring trip down memory lane led me to reflect on how my experiences growing up in the SF Bay Area differ from those of my Asian friends’ who did not grow up in predominantly Asian areas. In fact, though I enjoy the nostalgia these moments bring, I’ve discussed the Asian American experience with my friends from high school extensively already, and the real joy I derive from this game is knowing that it can reach people of a similar demographic to mine who may not be able to talk openly about their identity. By drawing from her own life, Lei created a game that can connect with players of diverse backgrounds, validating the experiences of those who may feel alone in their struggles.

“Butterfly Soup” is a heartwarming visual novel whose art style, digital structure, and Gen Z humor palatably packages its more serious themes, creating a game that appeals to a broad audience and especially tugs on the heartstrings of the “gay asian girls” it advertised. Needless to say, after my playthrough, I happily gave Brianna Lei a $5 donation for the game’s artbook as my virtual coffee table’s centerpiece.
